README.md, before:

# Astro Analytics — VS Code Extension [![Version](https://img.shields.io/visual-studio-marketplace/v/kieksme.astro-analytics)](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=kieksme.astro-analytics)

> 🧑‍🚀 Not sure what Astro is? See the Astro website at [astro.build](https://astro.build)!

**Publisher:** kieks.me GbR

Shows Google Analytics GA4 metrics directly in VS Code when you open Astro Markdown or `.astro` files.

## Features

- **CodeLens** at the top of each `.md`/`.mdx`/`.astro` file with Bounce Rate, Views, Users, and Session Duration
- **Explorer** — Bounce rate shown next to file names in the directory tree when analytics data exists (badge + tooltip)
- **Hover tooltip** with full metrics table (hover over the first lines of the file)
- **Status Bar** in the bottom-right with the Bounce Rate of the currently open page
- Automatic caching (5-minute TTL), manual refresh on click

## Bounce Rate Color Coding

The extension shows bounce rate with colored indicators (green / yellow / orange / red) in CodeLens, Explorer file tree, hover, status bar, and the dashboard:

| Level | Bounce Rate               |
|-------|---------------------------|
| 🟢    | < 25% — Very good         |
| 🟡    | 25–44% — Good             |
| 🟠    | 45–64% — Average          |
| 🔴    | ≥ 65% — Needs improvement |

## Setup

### 1. Prepare credentials

The extension requires Google Application Default Credentials with the `analytics.readonly` scope.

If you don't have them yet, create ADC. For a visual walkthrough, see e.g. [Authenticate with GCP using gcloud auth application-default login](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5utoA5gnKQ4).

```bash
gcloud auth application-default login \
  --scopes https://www.googleapis.com/auth/analytics.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/cloud-platform \
  --client-id-file=~/Certificates/gcp/internal-dev.json
```

The path to the created credentials file is printed in the console:

```text
Credentials saved to file: [~/.config/gcloud/application_default_credentials.json]
```

### 2. Configure the extension

In VS Code: `Cmd+,` → search for **Astro Analytics**

| Setting                          | Description               | Default       |
|----------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------|
| `astroAnalytics.propertyId`      | GA4 Property ID (numeric) | `364493652`   |
| `astroAnalytics.credentialsPath` | Path to credentials JSON  | (ADC default) |
| `astroAnalytics.lookbackDays`    | Time range in days        | `30`          |
| `astroAnalytics.contentRoot`     | Astro content folder      | `src/content` |
| `astroAnalytics.pagesRoot`       | Astro pages folder        | `src/pages`   |

Example `settings.json`:

```json
{
  "astroAnalytics.propertyId": "364493652",
  "astroAnalytics.credentialsPath": "~/.config/gcloud/application_default_credentials.json",
  "astroAnalytics.lookbackDays": 90,
  "astroAnalytics.contentRoot": "src/content",
  "astroAnalytics.pagesRoot": "src/pages"
}
```

### 3. URL slug mapping

The extension requests GA4 dimension `pagePath` and derives the slug from the file path:

```text
src/content/blog/datenstrategie-ki.md  →  /blog/datenstrategie-ki/
src/content/karriere/index.md          →  /karriere/
src/pages/blog/my-post.astro           →  /blog/my-post/
src/pages/index.astro                  →  /
```

**Dynamic routes** (`[slug].astro`, `[...slug].astro`, `[slug]/[id].astro`) are supported:

- In the **dashboard**, a GA4 path like `/blog/` can resolve to a dynamic route file (e.g. `src/pages/[slug].astro`) when no static file exists, so the row stays clickable and opens that file.
- When you **open a dynamic route file**, the extension shows **aggregated** bounce rate, views, users, and session duration for all GA4 paths that match that route (e.g. all single-segment paths for `[slug].astro`).

### 4. Test that data is loading

If you don’t see any metrics (CodeLens shows “no data” or status bar stays empty):

1. **Run the test command**  
   `Cmd+Shift+P` → **“Astro Analytics: Test API Connection”**.  
   You can also run **“Astro Analytics: Open Dashboard”** to open a dashboard tab in the editor area with a sortable table of cached pages, bounce rate indicators, clickable page links (open in editor), and a refresh button.  
   The **Output** panel (channel “Astro Analytics”) will show:
   - Whether the GA4 API call succeeded and how many page paths were returned
   - The first 15 `pagePath` values from GA4 (so you can compare with your slug mapping)
   - If a `.md`/`.mdx`/`.astro` file is open: the **current file’s slug** and whether it matches any GA4 path

2. **Check configuration**  
   Ensure `astroAnalytics.propertyId` is set (numeric GA4 Property ID) and, if needed, `astroAnalytics.credentialsPath` points to your credentials JSON.

3. **Check slug matching**  
   GA4 `pagePath` and the extension’s slug both use a trailing slash (e.g. `/blog/my-post/`). If your site sends paths without a trailing slash, the extension normalizes them for lookup; the test output shows both raw and normalized paths.

4. **Check the Output channel**  
   After a normal refresh, the same channel logs e.g. `Loaded N pages from GA4` and sample `pagePath` values. Any API errors appear there and as an error notification.

**If the command "Astro Analytics: Test API Connection" is not found:**  
Rebuild the extension and reload the window. See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for build and reload steps.

## Localization

The extension is localized for the following languages. The UI (commands, settings, dashboard, messages) follows the VS Code display language when a translation is available:

| Language                      | Locale  |
|-------------------------------|---------|
| English                       | `en`    |
| German                        | `de`    |
| French                        | `fr`    |
| Spanish                       | `es`    |
| Italian                       | `it`    |
| Portuguese                    | `pt`    |
| Dutch                         | `nl`    |
| Polish                        | `pl`    |
| Russian                       | `ru`    |
| Mandarin (Simplified Chinese) | `zh-cn` |
| Japanese                      | `ja`    |
| Hindi                         | `hi`    |
| Korean                        | `ko`    |
| Indonesian                    | `id`    |
| Vietnamese                    | `vi`    |
| Thai                          | `th`    |
| Bengali                       | `bn`    |

Translations are provided via `package.nls.*.json` (contributed UI) and `l10n/bundle.l10n.*.json` (extension messages and dashboard).

## Installation

Install from the [VS Code Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=kieksme.astro-analytics) or from a `.vsix` file (`Cmd+Shift+P` → **"Install from VSIX..."**). To build from source, see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).

Commit message:

feat(dashboard): enhance localization and dashboard functionality
- Updated README to clarify dashboard localization for sidebar and full panel, specifying the use of current VS Code display language.
- Refactored dashboard code to integrate localized strings for UI elements, improving user experience across different languages.
- Added a new function to build a dashboard localization object, ensuring consistent terminology and improved accessibility for users.
- Adjusted HTML templates to utilize localized strings for various dashboard components, enhancing the overall user interface.

README.md, after:

# Astro Analytics — VS Code Extension [![Version](https://img.shields.io/visual-studio-marketplace/v/kieksme.astro-analytics)](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=kieksme.astro-analytics)

> 🧑‍🚀 Not sure what Astro is? See the Astro website at [astro.build](https://astro.build)!

**Publisher:** kieks.me GbR

Shows Google Analytics GA4 metrics directly in VS Code when you open Astro Markdown or `.astro` files.

## Features

- **CodeLens** at the top of each `.md`/`.mdx`/`.astro` file with Bounce Rate, Views, Users, and Session Duration
- **Explorer** — Bounce rate shown next to file names in the directory tree when analytics data exists (badge + tooltip)
- **Hover tooltip** with full metrics table (hover over the first lines of the file)
- **Status Bar** in the bottom-right with the Bounce Rate of the currently open page
- Automatic caching (5-minute TTL), manual refresh on click

## Bounce Rate Color Coding

The extension shows bounce rate with colored indicators (green / yellow / orange / red) in CodeLens, Explorer file tree, hover, status bar, and the dashboard:

| Level | Bounce Rate               |
|-------|---------------------------|
| 🟢    | < 25% — Very good         |
| 🟡    | 25–44% — Good             |
| 🟠    | 45–64% — Average          |
| 🔴    | ≥ 65% — Needs improvement |

## Setup

### 1. Prepare credentials

The extension requires Google Application Default Credentials with the `analytics.readonly` scope.

If you don't have them yet, create ADC. For a visual walkthrough, see e.g. [Authenticate with GCP using gcloud auth application-default login](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5utoA5gnKQ4).

```bash
gcloud auth application-default login \
  --scopes https://www.googleapis.com/auth/analytics.readonly,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/cloud-platform \
  --client-id-file=~/Certificates/gcp/internal-dev.json
```

The path to the created credentials file is printed in the console:

```text
Credentials saved to file: [~/.config/gcloud/application_default_credentials.json]
```

### 2. Configure the extension

In VS Code: `Cmd+,` → search for **Astro Analytics**

| Setting                          | Description               | Default       |
|----------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------|
| `astroAnalytics.propertyId`      | GA4 Property ID (numeric) | `364493652`   |
| `astroAnalytics.credentialsPath` | Path to credentials JSON  | (ADC default) |
| `astroAnalytics.lookbackDays`    | Time range in days        | `30`          |
| `astroAnalytics.contentRoot`     | Astro content folder      | `src/content` |
| `astroAnalytics.pagesRoot`       | Astro pages folder        | `src/pages`   |

Example `settings.json`:

```json
{
  "astroAnalytics.propertyId": "364493652",
  "astroAnalytics.credentialsPath": "~/.config/gcloud/application_default_credentials.json",
  "astroAnalytics.lookbackDays": 90,
  "astroAnalytics.contentRoot": "src/content",
  "astroAnalytics.pagesRoot": "src/pages"
}
```

### 3. URL slug mapping

The extension requests GA4 dimension `pagePath` and derives the slug from the file path:

```text
src/content/blog/datenstrategie-ki.md  →  /blog/datenstrategie-ki/
src/content/karriere/index.md          →  /karriere/
src/pages/blog/my-post.astro           →  /blog/my-post/
src/pages/index.astro                  →  /
```

**Dynamic routes** (`[slug].astro`, `[...slug].astro`, `[slug]/[id].astro`) are supported:

- In the **dashboard**, a GA4 path like `/blog/` can resolve to a dynamic route file (e.g. `src/pages/[slug].astro`) when no static file exists, so the row stays clickable and opens that file.
- When you **open a dynamic route file**, the extension shows **aggregated** bounce rate, views, users, and session duration for all GA4 paths that match that route (e.g. all single-segment paths for `[slug].astro`).

### 4. Test that data is loading

If you don’t see any metrics (CodeLens shows “no data” or status bar stays empty):

1. **Run the test command**  
   `Cmd+Shift+P` → **“Astro Analytics: Test API Connection”**.  
   You can also run **“Astro Analytics: Open Dashboard”** to open a dashboard tab in the editor area with a sortable table of cached pages, bounce rate indicators, clickable page links (open in editor), and a refresh button.  
   The **Output** panel (channel “Astro Analytics”) will show:
   - Whether the GA4 API call succeeded and how many page paths were returned
   - The first 15 `pagePath` values from GA4 (so you can compare with your slug mapping)
   - If a `.md`/`.mdx`/`.astro` file is open: the **current file’s slug** and whether it matches any GA4 path

2. **Check configuration**  
   Ensure `astroAnalytics.propertyId` is set (numeric GA4 Property ID) and, if needed, `astroAnalytics.credentialsPath` points to your credentials JSON.

3. **Check slug matching**  
   GA4 `pagePath` and the extension’s slug both use a trailing slash (e.g. `/blog/my-post/`). If your site sends paths without a trailing slash, the extension normalizes them for lookup; the test output shows both raw and normalized paths.

4. **Check the Output channel**  
   After a normal refresh, the same channel logs e.g. `Loaded N pages from GA4` and sample `pagePath` values. Any API errors appear there and as an error notification.

**If the command "Astro Analytics: Test API Connection" is not found:**  
Rebuild the extension and reload the window. See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for build and reload steps.

## Localization

The extension is localized for the following languages. The UI (commands, settings, dashboard, messages) follows the VS Code display language when a translation is available:

| Language                      | Locale  |
|-------------------------------|---------|
| English                       | `en`    |
| German                        | `de`    |
| French                        | `fr`    |
| Spanish                       | `es`    |
| Italian                       | `it`    |
| Portuguese                    | `pt`    |
| Dutch                         | `nl`    |
| Polish                        | `pl`    |
| Russian                       | `ru`    |
| Mandarin (Simplified Chinese) | `zh-cn` |
| Japanese                      | `ja`    |
| Hindi                         | `hi`    |
| Korean                        | `ko`    |
| Indonesian                    | `id`    |
| Vietnamese                    | `vi`    |
| Thai                          | `th`    |
| Bengali                       | `bn`    |

Translations are provided via `package.nls.*.json` (contributed UI) and `l10n/bundle.l10n.*.json` (extension messages and dashboard). The dashboard (sidebar and full panel) uses the current VS Code display language and the same `dashboard.*` keys from the l10n bundles.

## Installation

Install from the [VS Code Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=kieksme.astro-analytics) or from a `.vsix` file (`Cmd+Shift+P` → **"Install from VSIX..."**). To build from source, see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).
